#10 (3) High-Rent-Vacancy and High-Rent High-Income Deregulation

(3) High-Rent-Vacancy and High-Rent High-Income Deregulation.
There are two ways to deregulate protected units: if the unit reaches a high-rent threshold and then is vacant, or if the unit reaches a high-rent threshold and if the tenant crosses a high-income threshold. 

High-Rent Vacancy deregulation occurs when a unit exceeds its legal monthly rent threshold. As of January 1, 2018, the legal Deregulation Rent Threshold (DRT) is the rent is $2,733.75, and increases each year in accordance with the 1-Year lease increases as approved by the Rent Guidelines Board. Be sure to check the current DRT level, as it changes each year. Once the rent for a unit reaches the legal DRT, the apartment becomes deregulated upon vacancy. Units that are receiving certain tax benefits like 421-a or J-51 are not eligible for High-Rent Vacancy as long as the tax benefits are being received. 

For more information see the Tenant’s Rights Guide, page 2: https://ag.ny.gov/sites/default/files/tenants_rights.pdf

There is some debate about how a unit can be deregulated using the high-rent vacancy regulation. As has generally been practiced, if the high rent threshold is reached during vacancy, it would be deregulated before a new lease was given to a new tenant. The Altman Ruling has challenged that interpretation, arguing that the deregulation threshold must be reached when the unit is occupied, and that it should be deregulated when the current resident leaves and a new lease is begun. However, it is still unclear whether this interpretation will be upheld in courts—some housing experts have their doubts.  

There are two important ways that landlords can legally raise rents in rent-regulated apartments aside from the allowable rent increases allowed by the Rent Guideline Board. First, is what is called a vacancy increase. In between leases, the landlord is entitled to increase the legal allowable rent by a certain percentage, that is, when one tenant leaves a unit and another moves in, the landlord is allowed to charge a rent increase during to vacancy. These vary depending on the length of lease that the new tenant chosen for their lease, but are usually somewhere between a 16 and 20 percent increase—which can add up. Second, landlords can pass off costs of improvements that they have made either to the building (Major Capital Improvements) or the apartment (Individual Apartment Improvements).  Combining these two increases is a common way for landlords to reach the DRT, and since there is little verification by any state agency, many rent-regulated apartments in New York City are often illegally deregulated. 

The High-Rent Vacancy Deregulation Process.
When the high rent threshold is met, two documents from the New York State Homes and Community Renewal (HRC) are involved: (1) an HRC HRVD-N and (2) an HRC annual apartment registration. The first document must either be provided at the signing of the new lease or be sent by certified mail to the new tenant within 30 days of when new tenancy commences or when the new lease has been signed by both parties. This document shows the last regulated rent, the reason for the deregulation, and how the new rent was calculated. It must also contain a statement that the tenant can verify the last legal regulated rent or maximum rent by contacting HRC.

The second form is a HCR annual apartment registration and must be filed with HRC. It indicates the unit’s status as permanently exempt from rent regulation laws and when the deregulation will take affect—generally on the April 1st following the deregulation filing. It must be sent to the first tenant within 30 days after the tenancy commences or the filing of the registration with HRC, whichever occurs later.

High-Rent High-Income deregulation occurs when the apartment has reached the Deregulation Rent Threshold (DRT) as listed above and the landlord can establish that the tenants living in the apartment have a “total annual federal adjusted gross income” that exceeds $200,000 for each of the preceding two calendar years. This method of deregulation would be used to deregulate a unit in which the high-rent threshold has been met, but the tenant isn’t planning on leaving anytime soon. If a landlord can establish that the tenants living in the unit have a combined income of more than $200,000 for the previous two calendar years, then they can permanently deregulate the unit. Units that are receiving certain tax benefits like 421-a or J-51 are not eligible for High-Rent High-Income as long as the tax benefits are being received. Additionally, units that have tenants with Senior Citizen Rent Increase Exemptions (SCRIE) or a Disability Rent Increase Exemptions (DRIE) will not be considered for deregulation. 
	
“Annual income” refers to the federal adjusted gross income as reported on the New York State Income Tax return, and “total annual income” refers to the sum of the annual incomes of all persons who occupy the apartment as their primary residence on other than a temporary basis. The annual incomes of employees of residents or sublettors is not included in the calculation, but rather the prime tenants. If the unit is leased by a corporation, their annual income is not considered. 

The High-Rent High-Income Deregulation Process.
This is somewhat more of a complicated process then the High-Rent Vacancy process, specifically, there are important dates before which paperwork must be filed.  
On or before May 1 of each year, the landlord can file an Income Certification Form (ICF) if and only if the apartment has reached the DRT. Tenants are required to certify whether the household’s total annual income was in excess of $200,000—considering only the individuals referenced in the ICF—for each of the two preceding calendar years. The ICF does not require disclosure of any income information other than whether the threshold for each of the two preceding years has been met. It must notify tenants of their protection against harassment and must be delivered either by certified or first class mail or in person. The tenant(s) must return the ICF to the owner within 30 days after service.
If the tenant has certified that their incomes exceeded $200,000 for the two previous calendar years, the landlord must file an Owner’s Petition for Deregulation (OPD) with HCR no later than June 30, which will request that no longer be subject to rent regulation upon expiration of the existing lease (rent stabilized apartment), or as of March 1 in the year next succeeding the filing of the OPD (rent controlled apartment).
If the tenant fails to return the ICF with 30 days after they have received it, or if the landlords disputes it, the landlord can file an OPD no later than June 30. The tenant will then have 60 days to submit the required information to the Department of Taxation and Finance (DTF) and HCR, failure to do so could result in an order to deregulate the unit. If DTF notifies HCR that it has determined that the total annual income was in excess of the threshold amount for each of the two preceding years, then HCR will notify the owner and tenants of the results of such determination, and both parties will have 30 days to comment. When the comment period expires, HCR will issue their order, which will be that the apartment is (1) still subject to rent regulation, (2) will be deregulated when the current lease expires, (3) will be deregulated as of March 1 in the year next succeeding the filing of the OPD for rent controlled apartments.

Facts Sheet 36 on the state site…currently under revision on the fact sheet site
http://www.nyshcr.org/Rent/FactSheets/orafac36.htm

For more information, take a look at Fact Sheet #26, here: http://www.nyshcr.org/Rent/FactSheets/orafac26.pdf

